Teaching, the profession of those who give instruction, especially in an elementary school or a
secondary school or in a university.

Measured in terms of its members, teaching is the world’s largest profession. In the 21st century it
was estimated that there were about 80 million teachers throughout the world. Though their roles and
functions vary from country to country, the variations among teachers are generally greater within a
country than they are between countries. Because the nature of the activities that constitute
teaching depends more on the age of the persons being taught than on any other one thing, it is
useful to recognize three subgroups of teachers: primary-school, or elementary-school, teachers;
secondary-school teachers; and university teachers. Elementary-school teachers are by far the most
numerous worldwide, making up nearly half of all teachers in some developed countries and
three-fourths or more in developing countries. Teachers at the university level are the smallest
group.

The entire teaching corps, wherever its members may be located, shares most of the criteria of a
profession, namely (1) a process of formal training, (2) a body of specialized knowledge, (3) a
procedure for certifying, or validating, membership in the profession, and (4) a set of standards of
performance—intellectual, practical, and ethical—that is defined and enforced by members of the
profession. Teaching young children and even adolescents could hardly have been called a profession
anywhere in the world before the 20th century. It was instead an art or a craft in which the
relatively young and untrained women and men who held most of the teaching positions “kept school”
or “heard lessons”because they had been better-than-average pupils themselves. They had learned the
art solely by observing and imitating their own teachers. Only university professors and possibly a
few teachers of elite secondary schools would have merited being called members of a profession in
the sense that medical doctors, lawyers, or priests were professionals; in some countries even today
primary-school teachers may accurately be described as semiprofessionals. The dividing line is
imprecise. It is useful, therefore, to consider the following questions: (1) What is the status of
the profession? (2) What kinds of work are done? (3) How is the profession organized?